THEORY
Light exhibits both wave-like and particle-like properties. One important consequence of its wave nature is diffraction, a phenomenon in which light bends slightly and spread when it passes around the edges of an object or through a small aperture. 
In Fraunhofer diffraction, both the source and the screen are at an infinite distance from the obstacle. As the result, the incident wavefront is plane. Thus, Fraunhofer diffraction is a specific type of diffraction that occurs when parallel light waves, usually from a very distant source pass through a narrow slit or diffracting object. The resulting pattern is observed on a screen at a far distance from the aperture or the focal plane of the converging lens. This far-field condition is crucial for the well-defined and stable diffraction pattern. 
 Let a parallel beam of monochromatic light of wavelength λ be incident normally upon a narrow-slit AB of width d, where it gets diffraction and spread out after passing through it as shown in fig. 1. If a converging lens L is placed in the path of the diffraction beam, a real image of the diffraction pattern is formed on the screen SS’ at its focal plane . 
Fig. 1 Young's double slit experiment (add image from /images/theory_fig1.png)

Path Difference, BD = ABsin𝜃 = dsin𝜃                                 (1)
The corresponding phase difference = (2𝜋/ λ) Path difference 
                                           ∅=(2π/λ dsinθ)                                   (2)
Now, consider the width AB of the slit divided into n equal parts. Each part forms an elementary source. The amplitude of vibration at Po due to the wave from each part will be the same, and the phase difference of the waves from any two consecutive parts is   =1/n (2π/λ ⅆsinθ)=e(let)
Hence, the resultant amplitude at Po is given by,
                                             A=(asin(nⅇ/2)  )/sin(ⅇ/2)                                         (3)
Since the magnitude intensity at any point in the focal plane of the lens is a function of 𝒂 and 𝜽. So, we obtain a series of maxima	and	minima.
Condition for a maximum (approximation):
	θ=0°, dsin𝜃 ≈ (k + ½) λ
	d ... width of slit
	𝜃... angle
	k ... order of the maximum (0,1, 2, 3, ...)
	λ... wavelength
Condition for a minimum:
	𝜃 >0°, dsin𝜃 = k λ
	d... width of slit
	𝜃 ... angle
	k ... order of the minimum (1, 2, 3, ...)
	λ ... wavelength


PRE-TEST
Q1. Fraunhofer diffraction occurs when
A) Source and screen are very close to the aperture
B) Source and screen are at finite distances
C) Source and screen are effectively at infinite distances
D) Light passes through two slits
Answer: C) Source and screen are effectively at infinite distances
Q2. The condition for the first minimum in single-slit Fraunhofer diffraction is
A) dsin⁡θ=λ/2
B) dsin⁡θ=λ
C) dsin⁡θ=2λ
D) dsin⁡θ=(2k+1)λ/2
Answer: B) dsin⁡θ=λ

Q3. The diffraction pattern of a circular aperture is known as
A) Newton’s rings
B) Interference fringes
C) Airy pattern
D) Fresnel fringes
Answer: C) Airy pattern

Q4. In single-slit Fraunhofer diffraction, the central maximum is
A) Narrower than secondary maxima
B) Equal in width to secondary maxima
C) Twice as wide as secondary maxima
D) Half the width of secondary maxima
Answer: C) Twice as wide as secondary maxima
Q5. The intensity distribution in Fraunhofer diffraction depends on
A) Only slit width
B) Only wavelength
C) Slit width, wavelength, and angle
D) Distance between source and screen
Answer: C) Slit width, wavelength, and angle

PROCEDURE
Step 1: Set the value of the wavelength, angle, and width of the	slit.
Step	2: Click on the diffraction pattern or intensity profile.
Step 3: When clicking on the diffraction pattern, a pattern will appear due to the single slit aperture as shown in fig. 2.
 fig. 2 Diffraction pattern due to single-slit (add image from /images/procedure_fig1.png)

 Step 4: If the intensity profile is clicked, then the pattern is observed as fig. 3. Here k is set to 1, it will display two intensity	profiles.
Fig. 3 Intensity profile due to single-slit (add image from /images/procedure_fig2.png)

Step 5: Change the wavelength and the width of slit to see the different pattern formation. This will give a sense of understanding how the pattern varies with changes in these parameters on which pattern depends.
Step 6: Take 5-10 readings for different parameters and note down them in Table 1 & 2. 

POST-TEST
Q1. In a Fraunhofer diffraction experiment, what does the order (k) in the formulas refer to?
 a: The number of diffracting objects used
 b: The color of the light source
 c: The specific type of material used for the aperture
 d: The location of a particular bright or dark fringe relative to the central maximum
Q2. A single slit diffracts white light. Which of the following colors will deviate the most from the straight-through direction?
 a: Red
 b: Green
 c: Blue
 d: All colors will diffract the same amount
Q3. In Fraunhofer diffraction at a single slit, what is the condition for the first minimum?
 a: d·sinθ = λ
 b: d·cosθ = λ/2
 c: d·sinθ = kλ
 d: d·tanθ = λ
Q4. What happens to the central maximum when the slit width is reduced in single-slit Fraunhofer diffraction?
 a: It becomes narrower
 b: It becomes wider
 c: It disappears
 d: It remains unchanged
Q5. In a diffraction grating experiment, what effect does increasing the number of slits have?
 a: The fringes become blurred
 b: The fringes become sharper and more intense
 c: The central maximum vanishes
 d: No diffraction occurs
